README.md, before:

# PiicoDev® Radio MicroPython Module

This is the firmware repo for the [Core Electronics PiicoDev® Radio](https://core-electronics.com.au/catalog/product/view/sku/CE08757)

This module depends on the [PiicoDev Unified Library](https://github.com/CoreElectronics/CE-PiicoDev-Unified), include `PiicoDev_Unified.py` in the project directory on your MicroPython device.

See the [Quickstart Guide](https://piico.dev/p27)

<!-- TODO verify the tested-devices list
This module has been tested on:
 - Micro:bit v2
 - Raspberry Pi Pico
 - Raspberry Pi SBC
-->

## Overview

![Overview](docs/overview.svg "Overview")

## Initialisation

### `PiicoDev_Radio(bus=, freq=, sda=, scl=, address=0x1A, id=, frequency=None, radio_address=0, channel=0, queue=3)`

| Parameter      | Type                     | Range             | Default                               | Description
| -------------- | ------------------------ | ----------------- | ------------------------------------- | -----------
| bus            | int                      | 0,1               | Raspberry Pi Pico: 0, Raspberry Pi: 1 | I2C Bus. Ignored on Micro:bit.
| freq           | int                      | 100 to 1000000    | Device dependent                      | I2C Bus frequency (Hz). Ignored on Raspberry Pi.
| sda            | Pin                      | Device Dependent  | Device Dependent                      | I2C SDA Pin. Implemented on Raspberry Pi Pico only.
| scl            | Pin                      | Device Dependent  | Device Dependent                      | I2C SCL Pin. Implemented on Raspberry Pi Pico only.
| address        | int                      | 0x1A, 0x08 - 0x77 | 0x1A                                  | Manually specify the address of the connected device. For when a software address is set on the device.
| id             | List[int, int, int, int] | 1=ON, 0=OFF       | [0,0,0,0]                             | Hardware switches change the device address - Abstracts the need for user to look up an address, simply input the switch positions. Alternatively, use `address` for explicit address.
| radio_adddress | int                      | 0 - 255           | 0                                     | See the `.radio_address` property for more information
| channel        | int                      | 0 - 255           | 0                                     | See the `.channel` property for more information
| queue          | int                      | 0 - 255           | 3                                     | See the `.queue` property for more information


## Properties

### `.radio_address`

(default=0) is an arbitrary name, expressed as an integer value from 0 to 255 (inclusive), that's used to filter incoming packets, keeping only those that match the address you set.

### `.channel`

(default=0) can be an integer value from 0 to 255 (inclusive) that defines an arbitrary "channel" to which the radio is tuned. Messages will be sent via this channel and only messages received via this channel will shown.

### `.queue`

(default=3) specifies the number of messages that can be stored on the incoming message queue. If there are no spaces left on the queue for incoming messages, then the incoming message is dropped.

### `.power`

(default=6) is an integer value from 0 to 7 (inclusive) to indicate the strength of signal used when broadcasting a message. The higher the value the stronger the signal, but the more power is consumed by the device. The numbering translates to positions in the following list of dBm (decibel milliwatt) values: -30, -20, -16, -12, -8, -4, 0, 4.

### `.data_rate`

(default=radio.RATE_1MBIT) indicates the speed at which data throughput takes place. Can be one of the following contants defined in the ``radio`` module : `RATE_250KBIT`, `RATE_1MBIT` or `RATE_2MBIT`.

## Methods

### `.on()`

Turns the radio on.

### `.off()`

Turns off the radio.

### `.send(message, value, address)`

Sends a message string. This is the equivalent of send_bytes(bytes(message, 'utf8')).

#### Examples

`radio.send('Hello')`

`radio.send('TempC', 25.0)`

`radio.send('Counter', 9)`

`radio.send('secret', radio_address=7)`

### `.receive()`

if radio.received_integer():
    print(radio.message)

if radio.received_number():
    print(radio.number)
    
if radio.received_value():
    print(radio.name, radio.value)
    
if radio.received_string():
    print(radio.message)

### Set or Get RFM69 Register Values

`value = radio.get_rfm69_register(0x29)`

`radio.set_rfm69_register(0x29, 221)`


## Payload

Note that when transmitting, no RSSI is sent, so:

Tx Position = Rx Position - 1


| Name                      | Rx Position | Bytes | Range        | Description
| ------------------------- | ----------- | ----- | ------------ | -----------
| rssi                      | 0           | 1     | 0 to 255     | RSSI (module negates the value)
| channel                   | 1           | 1     | 0 to 255     | Channel
| source_radio_adddress     | 2           | 1     | 1 to 255     | Source radio address
| destination_radio_address | 3           | 1     | 0 to 255     | Destination radio address
| type                      | 4           | 1     | 0 - 3        | Type of message (0: invalid, 1: key, int, 2: key, float, 3: message string)

If the type is 1 or 2:

| Name                      | Rx Position | Bytes | Range        | Description
| ------------------------- | ----------- | ----- | ------------ | -----------
| value                     | 5           | 4     |              | Value (int or float)
| length                    | 9           | 1     |              | Key length
| key                       | 10          | <=52  | 52 chars max | key

If the type is 3:

| Name                      | Rx Position | Bytes | Range        | Description
| ------------------------- | ----------- | ----- | ------------ | -----------
| length                    | 5           | 1     |              | Key length
| message                   | 6           | <=56  | 56 chars max | Message

## Smart Module I2C Registers

| Register Name     | Address   | Bytes  | Mode | Default Value    | Description
| ----------------- | --------- | ------ | ---- | ---------------- | -----------
| Device ID         | 0x01      | 2      | R    | 495              | I2C device ID
| Firmware Major    | 0x02      | 1      | R    | Varies           | Major firmware version
| Firmware Minor    | 0x03      | 1      | R    | Varies           | Minor firmware version
| I2C Address       | 0x84      | 1      | W    | 0xA1             | Set new I2C address
| LED               | 0x05/0x85 | 1      | R/W  | 1                | 0=OFF, 1=ON
| Tx Power          | 0x13/0x93 | 1      | R/W  |                  | -2 to +20 dBm
| RFM69 Radio State | 0x14/0x94 | 1      | R/W  | 0                | 0=OFF, 1=ON
| RFM69 Node ID     | 0x15/0x95 | 1      | R/W  | 1                | Do not change, addressing handled by the MicroPython driver
| RFM69 Network ID  | 0x16/0x96 | 1      | R/W  | 0                | Do not change, addressing handled by the MicroPython driver
| RFM69 To Node ID  | 0x17/0x97 | 1      | R/W  | 0                | Do not change, addressing handled by the MicroPython driver
| RFM69 Reg         | 0x98      | 1      | W    | N/A              | To read or write to a register in the RFM69, write the address of interest to this register then read or write the value to _RFM69 Value_ Register
| RFM69 Value       | 0x19/0x99 | 1      | R/W  | N/A              | To read or write to a register in the RFM69, write the address of interest to _RFM69 Reg_ Register then read or write the value this register
| RFM69 Reset       | 0xA0      | 1      | W    | 0                | Set to 1 to reset
| Payload Length    | 0x21/0xA1 | 1      | R/W  | N/A              | To send a message, write to the _Payload_ register, then write the length to this register to trigger sending of the message over the air. Read this register to check for a new message.
| Payload           | 0x22/0xA2 | 26 Max | R/W  | N/A              | To send a message, write the payload to this register, then write the length to the _Payload Length_ register to trigger sending of the message over the air. Read this register to check the contents of a new message.
| Payload New       | 0x23      | 1      | R    | 0                | A 1 indicates a new message has been received
| Payload Go        | 0xA4      | 1      | W    | 0                | To send a message, write to the length, then payload then set this to 1 to send the message

This library has been inspired by the [Micro:bit Radio library](https://microbit-micropython.readthedocs.io/en/v1.0.1/radio.html).

# License
This project is open source - please review the LICENSE.md file for further licensing information.

If you have any technical questions, or concerns about licensing, please contact technical support on the [Core Electronics forums](https://forum.core-electronics.com.au/).

*\"PiicoDev\" and the PiicoDev logo are trademarks of Core Electronics Pty Ltd.*

Outstanding Issues:
Tx Power doesn't seem to make any difference

Commit message:

Use RFM69 to control the channel and Arduino driver to control radio addressing

README.md, after:

# PiicoDev® Radio MicroPython Module

This is the firmware repo for the [Core Electronics PiicoDev® Radio](https://core-electronics.com.au/catalog/product/view/sku/CE08757)

This module depends on the [PiicoDev Unified Library](https://github.com/CoreElectronics/CE-PiicoDev-Unified), include `PiicoDev_Unified.py` in the project directory on your MicroPython device.

See the [Quickstart Guide](https://piico.dev/p27)

<!-- TODO verify the tested-devices list
This module has been tested on:
 - Micro:bit v2
 - Raspberry Pi Pico
 - Raspberry Pi SBC
-->

## Overview

![Overview](docs/overview.svg "Overview")

## Initialisation

### `PiicoDev_Radio(bus=, freq=, sda=, scl=, address=0x1A, id=, frequency=None, radio_address=0, channel=0, queue=3)`

| Parameter      | Type                     | Range             | Default                               | Description
| -------------- | ------------------------ | ----------------- | ------------------------------------- | -----------
| bus            | int                      | 0,1               | Raspberry Pi Pico: 0, Raspberry Pi: 1 | I2C Bus. Ignored on Micro:bit.
| freq           | int                      | 100 to 1000000    | Device dependent                      | I2C Bus frequency (Hz). Ignored on Raspberry Pi.
| sda            | Pin                      | Device Dependent  | Device Dependent                      | I2C SDA Pin. Implemented on Raspberry Pi Pico only.
| scl            | Pin                      | Device Dependent  | Device Dependent                      | I2C SCL Pin. Implemented on Raspberry Pi Pico only.
| address        | int                      | 0x1A, 0x08 - 0x77 | 0x1A                                  | Manually specify the address of the connected device. For when a software address is set on the device.
| id             | List[int, int, int, int] | 1=ON, 0=OFF       | [0,0,0,0]                             | Hardware switches change the device address - Abstracts the need for user to look up an address, simply input the switch positions. Alternatively, use `address` for explicit address.
| radio_adddress | int                      | 0 - 255           | 0                                     | See the `.radio_address` property for more information
| channel        | int                      | 0 - 255           | 0                                     | See the `.channel` property for more information
| queue          | int                      | 0 - 255           | 3                                     | See the `.queue` property for more information


## Properties

### `.radio_address`

(default=0) is an arbitrary name, expressed as an integer value from 0 to 255 (inclusive), that's used to filter incoming packets, keeping only those that match the address you set.

### `.channel`

(default=0) can be an integer value from 0 to 255 (inclusive) that defines an arbitrary "channel" to which the radio is tuned. Messages will be sent via this channel and only messages received via this channel will shown.

### `.queue`

(default=3) specifies the number of messages that can be stored on the incoming message queue. If there are no spaces left on the queue for incoming messages, then the incoming message is dropped.

### `.power`

(default=6) is an integer value from 0 to 7 (inclusive) to indicate the strength of signal used when broadcasting a message. The higher the value the stronger the signal, but the more power is consumed by the device. The numbering translates to positions in the following list of dBm (decibel milliwatt) values: -30, -20, -16, -12, -8, -4, 0, 4.

### `.data_rate`

(default=radio.RATE_1MBIT) indicates the speed at which data throughput takes place. Can be one of the following contants defined in the ``radio`` module : `RATE_250KBIT`, `RATE_1MBIT` or `RATE_2MBIT`.

## Methods

### `.on()`

Turns the radio on.

### `.off()`

Turns off the radio.

### `.send(message, value, address)`

Sends a message string. This is the equivalent of send_bytes(bytes(message, 'utf8')).

#### Examples

`radio.send('Hello')`

`radio.send('TempC', 25.0)`

`radio.send('Counter', 9)`

`radio.send('secret', radio_address=7)`

### `.receive()`

if radio.received_integer():
    print(radio.message)

if radio.received_number():
    print(radio.number)
    
if radio.received_value():
    print(radio.name, radio.value)
    
if radio.received_string():
    print(radio.message)

### Set or Get RFM69 Register Values

`value = radio.get_rfm69_register(0x29)`

`radio.set_rfm69_register(0x29, 221)`

| channel                   |             | 1     | 0 to 255     | Channel
| source_radio_adddress     |             | 1     | 1 to 255     | Source radio address
| destination_radio_address |             | 1     | 0 to 255     | Destination radio address


## Payload

Note that when transmitting, no RSSI or from_radio_address from is sent, so:

Tx Position = Rx Position - 2


| Name                      | Rx Position | Bytes | Range        | Description
| ------------------------- | ----------- | ----- | ------------ | -----------
| rssi                      | 0           | 1     | 0 to 255     | RSSI (module negates the value)
| source_radio_address        | 1           | 1     | 0 to 255     | Source Radio Address
| type                      | 2           | 1     | 0 - 3        | Type of message (0: invalid, 1: key, int, 2: key, float, 3: message string)

If the type is 1 or 2:

| Name                      | Rx Position | Bytes | Range        | Description
| ------------------------- | ----------- | ----- | ------------ | -----------
| value                     | 3           | 4     |              | Value (int or float)
| length                    | 7           | 1     |              | Key length
| key                       | 8           | <=55  | 55 chars max | key

If the type is 3:

| Name                      | Rx Position | Bytes | Range        | Description
| ------------------------- | ----------- | ----- | ------------ | -----------
| length                    | 3           | 1     |              | Key length
| message                   | 4           | <=58  | 59 chars max | Message

## Smart Module I2C Registers

| Register Name     | Address   | Bytes  | Mode | Default Value    | Description
| ----------------- | --------- | ------ | ---- | ---------------- | -----------
| Device ID         | 0x01      | 2      | R    | 495              | I2C device ID
| Firmware Major    | 0x02      | 1      | R    | Varies           | Major firmware version
| Firmware Minor    | 0x03      | 1      | R    | Varies           | Minor firmware version
| I2C Address       | 0x84      | 1      | W    | 0xA1             | Set new I2C address
| LED               | 0x05/0x85 | 1      | R/W  | 1                | 0=OFF, 1=ON
| Tx Power          | 0x13/0x93 | 1      | R/W  |                  | -2 to +20 dBm
| RFM69 Radio State | 0x14/0x94 | 1      | R/W  | 0                | 0=OFF, 1=ON
| RFM69 Node ID     | 0x15/0x95 | 1      | R/W  | 1                | Do not change, addressing handled by the MicroPython driver
| RFM69 Network ID  | 0x16/0x96 | 1      | R/W  | 0                | Do not change, addressing handled by the MicroPython driver
| RFM69 To Node ID  | 0x17/0x97 | 1      | R/W  | 0                | Do not change, addressing handled by the MicroPython driver
| RFM69 Reg         | 0x98      | 1      | W    | N/A              | To read or write to a register in the RFM69, write the address of interest to this register then read or write the value to _RFM69 Value_ Register
| RFM69 Value       | 0x19/0x99 | 1      | R/W  | N/A              | To read or write to a register in the RFM69, write the address of interest to _RFM69 Reg_ Register then read or write the value this register
| RFM69 Reset       | 0xA0      | 1      | W    | 0                | Set to 1 to reset
| Payload Length    | 0x21/0xA1 | 1      | R/W  | N/A              | To send a message, write to the _Payload_ register, then write the length to this register to trigger sending of the message over the air. Read this register to check for a new message.
| Payload           | 0x22/0xA2 | 26 Max | R/W  | N/A              | To send a message, write the payload to this register, then write the length to the _Payload Length_ register to trigger sending of the message over the air. Read this register to check the contents of a new message.
| Payload New       | 0x23      | 1      | R    | 0                | A 1 indicates a new message has been received
| Payload Go        | 0xA4      | 1      | W    | 0                | To send a message, write to the length, then payload then set this to 1 to send the message

This library has been inspired by the [Micro:bit Radio library](https://microbit-micropython.readthedocs.io/en/v1.0.1/radio.html).

# License
This project is open source - please review the LICENSE.md file for further licensing information.

If you have any technical questions, or concerns about licensing, please contact technical support on the [Core Electronics forums](https://forum.core-electronics.com.au/).

*\"PiicoDev\" and the PiicoDev logo are trademarks of Core Electronics Pty Ltd.*

Outstanding Issues:
Tx Power doesn't seem to make any difference
Now that we are using the radio's built-in addressing scheme, need to make it so that we send the from
